I was born in a country
that no longer exists,
and raised by a single mother
who sold ties at a department store.
I bring this up
because the story about my father
begins with my mother.
She's the one who made him
a cut-out in our family album;
an empty hole,
a reminder of what wasn't there.
I was seven years old when I last saw him,
but even before then,
he was missing from my life.
The Soviet Union had long collapsed,
and by then, so had my family.
We became desperate overnight,
running from landlords and collecting
bottles in exchange for food.
I have few memories
of my father at this time.
In one, we're dancing together
in our tiny apartment in Moscow.
In another, he's leaving.
He liked to leave.
He was good at it.
It became a game, of sorts, for him.
He would visit once every few weeks
and then leave again.
I would wait.
That was the worst bit of this game,
the waiting.
His visits lasted no longer
than a few hours,
most of that time spent with my brother.
I would wait for him to notice me.
It's not that he didn't love me.
But I can't say he did, either.
The year was 1996.
My mother woke me up
and said we were going on a trip.
The next day, we arrived
in our new home, in California.
We had spent years watching
the American soap opera "Santa Barbara,"
and now, we were there.
We never said good-bye to my father.
For the next year,
I continued to play my game.
I would stare at airplanes,
waiting for him to come find me.
He never did.
As the years went by,
I stopped thinking about him.
I stopped listening to the stories
told by my mother,
of the man who destroyed my family.
Instead, I invented my own father.
He was the man who always wanted
to be next to me,
but died when I was seven.
It was easier than trying to understand
why he wasn't there.
It took me 15 years to find the courage
to travel halfway around the world,
to stand at the courtyard of his home.
It's the same gray,
decaying Soviet building
my parents lived in
after they got married.
You could say I had come home.
But that's not how it felt.
I knocked on his door;
he didn't know I would be coming.
All these years later,
I found my father standing
just how I left him:
in the doorway, neither fully in
or out of my life.
That's my lovely grandfather watching TV.
(Laughter)
He showed me inside.
He had changed almost nothing.
His home resembled a museum,
the walls covered with my grandfather's
oil-painted and faded family images.
Even my brother's childhood toys
were still there,
stored in an attic closet.
It felt familiar at first,
even reassuring.
He showed me photos of us together,
he told me about the time
we got lost in the woods,
and played home movies
he made in my childhood.
They began so simply,
a string of moments --
snapshots of our life together.
(Music)
(Music ends)
But that was the past.
The man standing across from me
didn't recognize me.
I didn't recognize him, either.
I felt out of place.
He said he had been looking for me.
He opened a suitcase.
Inside, I found letters,
a newspaper clipping,
and a shirt for my brother's
future wedding --
items my grandfather put aside
in case he would one day meet us.
In the classified section of a newspaper,
my grandfather writes,
"Please help me find my grandchildren,
they've been taken to America."
For 15 years, my grandfather
would trawl the newspapers
in search of addresses to send letters,
hundreds of them sent to homes in America.
None made it to our doorstep.
A part of me wanted
to get to know my father.
There had been a life before he had me.
I eventually moved in with him.
We would often spend
the mornings together,
my father sitting across
the kitchen table,
telling me stories,
like we were old friends.
I had forgotten so much about him:
the shape of his face,
the sound of his voice,
the way he laughed.
I listened to him speak about the past
and his feelings for my mother.
My parents met in university in Armenia.
My mother had just turned 21.
It's odd to see images of them together.
They look so happy, so in love.
All I ever knew was her disappointment.
Not too long ago,
my father had another child,
a little girl.
I should be happy for him.
But watching him play with her
feels like a bruise
someone keeps pressing.
I can't help but wonder
why she gets to have a father,
and I don't.
Even now, there are moments
when I feel so close to him,
like the night he shared
his poetry with me.
Or the time at the symphony
he snuck in chocolates for us.
We ate them in the dark.
But then, all at once, he's not there,
as if those moments
had never even existed.
He's not the only one who's distant.
I often don't know
how to behave around my father.
Sometimes he watches me brush my hair,
or reaches to embrace me.
When he does, I pull away.
I still don't know what he is to me
or what I am to him.
I started to photograph him,
the space between us,
as a way of working through that void.
He picked up his camera as well,
and started to photograph me.
It was a way for us to be together
without the past intruding.
In some of his images,
he wrote messages to express
the things he couldn't say otherwise.
"I'm searching for
the little girl in her," he writes,
"The little girl I used to know,
the one I was once close to.
In myself, I'm searching for the feelings
I once felt for her."
When I look at him,
I see so much of myself --
his desire to be alone
and his need to create.
When I focus on that,
there's something there.
But when I look back, I see a hole
his current presence will never fill.
And that's often where my focus ends up,
making this not so much
a photography project,
but a wound.
And I've only now realized how deep it is.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Bruno Giussani: That is a very powerful
story, thank you for sharing it.
What are you working on now?
Diana Markosian: After this project,
my entire focus on my profession
and my work shifted,
and it became much more personal.
And all of my projects, all of my thinking
became much more personal.
So, for the last year, I've been traveling
between Turkey and Armenia,
looking at the Armenian genocide,
and working on a story
for the Smithsonian,
and also a piece for National Geographic
that's going to be published in December.
BG: We're looking forward to that.
Thank you for coming
and sharing your story.
DM: Thank you.
(Applause)